README.md, before:

<p align="center">
    <img src="doc/logo.png"/>
</p>

# Vanilla Javascript Typesystem

This library provides a comprehensive suite of utility functions for type checking in vanilla JavaScript without the need for any additional frameworks or a compiler. It offers an immediate and proactive way of validating data types during the development process, which can be particularly useful in a language like JavaScript where types can be loosely defined It is very simple and aims at staying simple to use.These helper functions throw errors immediately when a type mismatch or invalid parameter is detected, facilitating early error discovery and making debugging easier. Furthermore, there's a function to verify if a given JSON object matches a specific schema, a feature which is quite useful when working with JSON data from an API. It makes debugging frontend to backend communication and inconsistencies easier. This library is a simple way to enforce strict type checking with zero maintenance costs. 

Maybe we do not need another framework but a typesystem on the side.

## Features

- Javascript type assertions with some nice quirks
- Object check against a type schema (for receiving response from backend apis for example)
- An interesting alpha experiment of an HTML node type compiling to and from an HTMLElement recursively

## Integrate with Makefile

```Makefile
.PHONY: fetch-tinyveil
fetch-tinyveil: $(BUILDDIR)
	cd $(CURDIR) && rm -f web/js/lib/tinyveil.js && cd $(BUILDDIR) && rm -rf tmp && mkdir tmp && cd tmp && \
	git clone https://github.com/arthurweinmann/tinyveil.git && \
	cd tinyveil && mv tinyveil.js $(CURDIR)/web/js/lib/ && cd $(BUILDDIR) && rm -rf tmp

$(BUILDDIR):
	@mkdir -p $(BUILDDIR)
```

## Usage

First, include tinyveil.js in your project.

Here are some examples:

```javascript
const roles = ['admin', 'user', 'guest'];

const API_RESPONSES_SCHEMAS = {
    "get_user": {
        "name": "string",
        "age": {
            "type": "number",
            "optional": true,
        },
        "role": "string",
    }
}

class User {
    /**
     * 
     * @param {string} name 
     * @param {number} age 
     * @param {string} role 
     */
    constructor(name, age, role) {
        AssertTypeOf('string', name);
        AssertTypeOf('number', age);
        AssertEnum(role, roles);

        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.role = role;
    }

    static ParseUserFromAPI(userJson) {
        CheckJsonAgainstSchema(userJson, API_RESPONSES_SCHEMAS["get_user"]);
    }
}

let schema = {
    "id": "number",
    "name": "string",
    "active": "boolean",
    "details": {
        "email": "string",
        "age": "number"
    },
    "optionalField": {
        "type": "string",
        "optional": true
    },
    "tableau": ["number"],
    "tableau2": ["string"]
};
let myJson = {
    "id": 1,
    "name": "John",
    "active": true,
    "details": {
        "email": "john@example.com",
        "age": 30
    },
    "tableau": [1, 2, 3],
    "tableau2": ["a", "b", "c"],
    // "optionalField" is missing, but that's okay because it's optional
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(myJson, schema) !== true) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

let userSchema = {
    "name": "string",
    "age": { "type": "number", "optional": true },
    "address": { "type": "$addressSchema" }
};

let addressSchema = {
    "street": "string",
    "city": "string",
    "state": "string",
    "country": "string",
    "zip": "string"
};

let referencedSchemas = {
    "$addressSchema": addressSchema
};

let userObject = {
    "name": "John Doe",
    "age": 25,
    "address": {
        "street": "123 Main St",
        "city": "Anytown",
        "state": "Anystate",
        "country": "USA",
        "zip": "12345"
    }
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(userObject, userSchema, referencedSchemas) !== true) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

userObject = {
    "name": "John Doe",
    "address": {
        "city": "Anytown",
        "state": "Anystate",
        "country": "USA",
        "zip": "12345"
    }
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(userObject, userSchema, referencedSchemas) !== false) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

let htmlSchema = {
    "tagName": "string",
    "attributes": {
        "id": "string",
        "class": "string"
    },
    "children": {
        "type": ["$htmlSchema"],
        "optional": true,
    }
};
let nodeWithChildren = {
    "tagName": "div",
    "attributes": {
        "id": "",
        "class": "className"
    },
    "children": [
        {
            "tagName": "div",
            "attributes": {
                "id": "",
                "class": "className2"
            },
            "children": [
                {
                    "tagName": "div",
                    "attributes": {
                        "id": "",
                        "class": "className3"
                    },
                },
            ],
        },
        {
            "tagName": "div",
            "attributes": {
                "id": "id1",
                "class": ""
            },
            "children": [

            ],
        }
    ],
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(nodeWithChildren, htmlSchema, {"$htmlSchema": htmlSchema}) !== true) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

let htmlNodeType = HTMLElementType.FromNode(document.querySelector("html"));

let newelem = htmlNodeType.ToHTML({"#test": {innerText: "Replaced text"}});

if (newelem.children.length != 2 ||
newelem.children[1].children[0].innerText !== "Replaced text") {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

// You can also check that fields are of a certain class instance, for example if we have the class Decimal:
class MyJavascriptClass {
    constructor() {}
}

CheckObjectAgainstSchema(point, {
    x: "#MyJavascriptClass",
    y: "#MyJavascriptClass"
}, { "#MyJavascriptClass": MyJavascriptClass }); // use the # to identify classes provided in the reference parameter

// To test an array and not a root object containing an array, for now the best way to do this is to put the array into a temporary object for the test as so:
CheckObjectAgainstSchema({ result: result }, {
   result: [
       {
           a: "number",
           b: "number",
           c: "string",
           d: "string"
       }
   ], 
{});
```

For more information on each function and class, please refer to the comments above their definitions in the code.

## License

Please refer to the license file.

Commit message:

why library instead of framework

README.md, after:

<p align="center">
    <img src="doc/logo.png"/>
</p>

# Vanilla Javascript Typesystem

This library provides a comprehensive suite of utility functions for type checking in vanilla JavaScript without the need for any additional frameworks or a compiler. It offers an immediate and proactive way of validating data types during the development process, which can be particularly useful in a language like JavaScript where types can be loosely defined It is very simple and aims at staying simple to use.These helper functions throw errors immediately when a type mismatch or invalid parameter is detected, facilitating early error discovery and making debugging easier. Furthermore, there's a function to verify if a given JSON object matches a specific schema, a feature which is quite useful when working with JSON data from an API. It makes debugging frontend to backend communication and inconsistencies easier. This library is a simple way to enforce strict type checking with zero maintenance costs. 

```
you start by using a framework, but at some later point in time, you find yourself having outgrown the framework (or the framework has stagnated for too long), and you want to switch. This can be really hard, because frameworks shape your code, and each framework is different, so there is no easy migration path. The contact surface with libraries, on the other hand, is often very small, making a switch from one library to another a much smaller task, with a low blast radius.
```

## Features

- Javascript type assertions with some nice quirks
- Object check against a type schema (for receiving response from backend apis for example)
- An interesting alpha experiment of an HTML node type compiling to and from an HTMLElement recursively

## Integrate with Makefile

```Makefile
.PHONY: fetch-tinyveil
fetch-tinyveil: $(BUILDDIR)
	cd $(CURDIR) && rm -f web/js/lib/tinyveil.js && cd $(BUILDDIR) && rm -rf tmp && mkdir tmp && cd tmp && \
	git clone https://github.com/arthurweinmann/tinyveil.git && \
	cd tinyveil && mv tinyveil.js $(CURDIR)/web/js/lib/ && cd $(BUILDDIR) && rm -rf tmp

$(BUILDDIR):
	@mkdir -p $(BUILDDIR)
```

## Usage

First, include tinyveil.js in your project.

Here are some examples:

```javascript
const roles = ['admin', 'user', 'guest'];

const API_RESPONSES_SCHEMAS = {
    "get_user": {
        "name": "string",
        "age": {
            "type": "number",
            "optional": true,
        },
        "role": "string",
    }
}

class User {
    /**
     * 
     * @param {string} name 
     * @param {number} age 
     * @param {string} role 
     */
    constructor(name, age, role) {
        AssertTypeOf('string', name);
        AssertTypeOf('number', age);
        AssertEnum(role, roles);

        this.name = name;
        this.age = age;
        this.role = role;
    }

    static ParseUserFromAPI(userJson) {
        CheckJsonAgainstSchema(userJson, API_RESPONSES_SCHEMAS["get_user"]);
    }
}

let schema = {
    "id": "number",
    "name": "string",
    "active": "boolean",
    "details": {
        "email": "string",
        "age": "number"
    },
    "optionalField": {
        "type": "string",
        "optional": true
    },
    "tableau": ["number"],
    "tableau2": ["string"]
};
let myJson = {
    "id": 1,
    "name": "John",
    "active": true,
    "details": {
        "email": "john@example.com",
        "age": 30
    },
    "tableau": [1, 2, 3],
    "tableau2": ["a", "b", "c"],
    // "optionalField" is missing, but that's okay because it's optional
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(myJson, schema) !== true) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

let userSchema = {
    "name": "string",
    "age": { "type": "number", "optional": true },
    "address": { "type": "$addressSchema" }
};

let addressSchema = {
    "street": "string",
    "city": "string",
    "state": "string",
    "country": "string",
    "zip": "string"
};

let referencedSchemas = {
    "$addressSchema": addressSchema
};

let userObject = {
    "name": "John Doe",
    "age": 25,
    "address": {
        "street": "123 Main St",
        "city": "Anytown",
        "state": "Anystate",
        "country": "USA",
        "zip": "12345"
    }
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(userObject, userSchema, referencedSchemas) !== true) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

userObject = {
    "name": "John Doe",
    "address": {
        "city": "Anytown",
        "state": "Anystate",
        "country": "USA",
        "zip": "12345"
    }
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(userObject, userSchema, referencedSchemas) !== false) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

let htmlSchema = {
    "tagName": "string",
    "attributes": {
        "id": "string",
        "class": "string"
    },
    "children": {
        "type": ["$htmlSchema"],
        "optional": true,
    }
};
let nodeWithChildren = {
    "tagName": "div",
    "attributes": {
        "id": "",
        "class": "className"
    },
    "children": [
        {
            "tagName": "div",
            "attributes": {
                "id": "",
                "class": "className2"
            },
            "children": [
                {
                    "tagName": "div",
                    "attributes": {
                        "id": "",
                        "class": "className3"
                    },
                },
            ],
        },
        {
            "tagName": "div",
            "attributes": {
                "id": "id1",
                "class": ""
            },
            "children": [

            ],
        }
    ],
};
if (CheckObjectAgainstSchema(nodeWithChildren, htmlSchema, {"$htmlSchema": htmlSchema}) !== true) {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

let htmlNodeType = HTMLElementType.FromNode(document.querySelector("html"));

let newelem = htmlNodeType.ToHTML({"#test": {innerText: "Replaced text"}});

if (newelem.children.length != 2 ||
newelem.children[1].children[0].innerText !== "Replaced text") {
    throw new Error("invalid response");
}

// You can also check that fields are of a certain class instance, for example if we have the class Decimal:
class MyJavascriptClass {
    constructor() {}
}

CheckObjectAgainstSchema(point, {
    x: "#MyJavascriptClass",
    y: "#MyJavascriptClass"
}, { "#MyJavascriptClass": MyJavascriptClass }); // use the # to identify classes provided in the reference parameter

// To test an array and not a root object containing an array, for now the best way to do this is to put the array into a temporary object for the test as so:
CheckObjectAgainstSchema({ result: result }, {
   result: [
       {
           a: "number",
           b: "number",
           c: "string",
           d: "string"
       }
   ], 
{});
```

For more information on each function and class, please refer to the comments above their definitions in the code.

## License

Please refer to the license file.
